Otakar Březina: A Study in Czech Literature


					Paul Selver





1921





Exported from Wikisource on September 10, 2025





OTAKAR BŘEZINA

I



Otakar Březina was born in the year 1868 at Počátky, a small town in southern Bohemia. His real name is Václav Jebavý, the now more familiar pseudonym having been adopted for literary purposes. (An equally striking example of pseudonymous fame in Czech literature is that of the great Jaroslav Vrchlický, who in private life was Emil Frida.) Březina, a school-teacher by profession, has published five volumes of poems,—“Secret Distances“ (1895), “Dawning in the West“ (1896), “Polar Winds“ (1897), “Temple Builders“ (1899), and “The Hands“” (1901), together with a series of prose essays, “The Music of the Springs“ (1903).

Březina’s most subjective writing is contained in his first volume. Thus, the opening poem, which significantly begins with the words: “O strength of ecstasies and dreams . . .“ provides such autobiographical lines as:



“Scantily in my life I breathed of friendship's fragrance“



————————————



“I ciphered life's account in solitary session,



And to the flower-bed of my dreamings I retreated:



More in the thought than in the deed was my transgression,



And phantoms I adored and blurred forebodings greeted.“



————————————



“My springtide was a mournful, elegiac song“



————————————



“My memories are colourless and parched“



————————————



“Poverty's acid savour did I taste betimes“



————————————





while in another poem, after referring to his mother who:

“. . . passed through life as in sad atonement;



Her day was void of fragrance, colours, blossoms, lustre.



Only parched fruit of life with an ashen savour



. . . she plucked from the tree of time“





he speaks of himself thus:



“I am the pale blossom of thy chill blood . . .



————————————



Life’s harsh savour was imprinted on my lips by thy kiss,



And sorrow has remained as thine heritage in my soul.



————————————



And my path is mournful, even as thine before;



My day is void of fragrance, colours, blossoms, lustre;



Only parched fruit of life with an ashen savour



. . . do I pluck from the tree of time.“[1]





In “The Secret Distances“ the poet seeks a refuge from the sorrows of reality. But the collection is not altogether homogeneous in character. On the one hand there are a number of poems which mark the ending rather than the beginning of a period in Březina’s inner development. This applies in particular to those verses which testify to moods of excessive introspection, resulting in such images as:—



“In steely, contracting circle the horizon narrowed. . . Gloom ripened.



Darksome brotherhoods of forests I beheld, bowing earthwards,



As in a chorus of prayers for the dead. The coverlet of heaven was lowered



Above my head, as if crushed and stretched down by twilight“.



(Anniversary).





Such a passage as this produces the impression that the poet’s flight from reality has distorted and blurred his scale of values, which, however, in his later volumes were to undergo a gradual adjustment.

On the other hand, there are poems which may be regarded as the true starting-point of Březina’s mental growth. In them the poet looks forward rather than backward, and indicates, although often in a rudimentary manner, the speculative and objective tendencies of his subsequent work. Thus, in the „Evening Prayer“ he expresses his desire to attain clairvoyant powers which will enable him to penetrate mysteries:



“Holy one, descend upon the dim lamp of my gaze,



Pour fresh oil in it, and enkindle comprehension;



With the ray of my glances let me behold, a myriad miles removed,



The dusk of ancient ocean-forests and summits of ecstasy;



How crystal is joined unto crystal within the bosom of rocks,



How lustre of colours gushes through fabric of blossoms,



How life, which slumbered in the bosom of matter,



Is roused to unending bloom and eddy and ferment of existence.“[2]





This suggests an outlook in sharp contrast to poems which reveal a preoccupation with death and suffering:—



“At bedsides, in dusk of forebodings, many a time, I know,



Before thy conquering gaze has my gaze been laid low.



——————————————



To far-hidden, unknown cities, pale and bewildered it went



In gloom and polar nights with journeyings mute and forspent.



——————————————



At bed-sides, in dusk of forebodings, many a time I know,



Before thy conquering gaze has my gaze been laid low.





As a sleep-walker lured from his bed, pallid, fettered and dumb,



My dream do I follow, and me an Unknown’s promptings benumb.





And in wearied hands of my days, aquiver before me arise



Lights of funeral torches enkindled by thine eyes.“



(Gaze of Death).





Moreover, this early collection includes two poems, “Fragrances of my soul’s gardens“ and “Grief“, whose form and style give a very definite foretaste of the plastic rhythm and pregnant imagery abounding in subsequent volumes. The former contains these typical lines:—



—————————————



“Fragrances of my soul’s gardens,



Fragrances upraised from flower-beds concealed by a myriad nights!



Fragrances of palm-groves and expanses of lilies in bloom,



Potions that soothe in moments of expiring twilights,



Gentle waft of cooling breath upon the sweat-covered brow



Borne from shores of silent rivers, which flow into bays of Death.



O, salutation soaring on the wind from distant oases,



O, resonant hymn of invisible waterfalls



Behind bluish mountain-ranges of the promised land



O, fragrances of unapproachable isles behind misty drifts



Of radiance, colours and shapes—



Beneath your clouds have ranged throngs of my perished dreams



Like processions of wearied pilgrims unto miraculous wellheads



Upon sacred hillocks and unto cathedrals!“



—————————





The following is from “Grief“:—

“In my soul I have grief of one fettered to a bed,



When victorious summons of chimes is aquiver from the topmost tower. . .



——————————



In my soul I have grief of a captive upon the day of Maytide festivities,



Grief of a lover by the church-portal upon the day of espousal,



—————————————



Grief of one weakened by searching for dreams at earliest azure of daybreaks,



Grief of gazes wearied by vain tarrying before departure,



Grief of withering countenances, which never were flushed with kisses,



Grief of a stranger, stirred by artless embrace of a Yule-tide song,



Grief of the musical instrument, hung above the couch of a dead master,



Grief of blossoms which none plucked and dedicated in vases upon the altar,



Grief of radiance which burned away in a lonely lamp



And which none placed into the bed-chamber of lovers. . .“



—————————————





These two poems represent, as it were, the first wider illumination of the darkness, the first signs of thaw in the frozen depths.

The concluding poem of the volume, “Art“, expresses Březina’s lofty conception of the poet’s calling, and a humble interpretation of his own creative powers:



—————————



“Beneath a vault aloof, upon a tiny shrine,



Where o’er a marble city towers thy metal fane,



Eternal One, durst I, marred with blood-lusts of mine,



My mass for Thee ordain?





“And soak the bread of life in wine of rapture, on



The altar table, which conceals in hallowed stead



’Neath roses of my dreams and lights of orison



The relics of thy dead?





“Or will thy body yield marvel of blood, perchance,



Vine-like, in golden goblet, heavy for my weak hands,



And with angelic lustre wilt thou light my glance,



Born amid twilight lands?”



—————————





While in the following lines he shows himself already conscious of the artist’s eternal unrest and travail, the “grievous stir of the unborn“:



“Upon my pyre of days I bid Thee: Torture, burn;



In sorrow’s prison-house blanch Thou my face as snow.“





Březina’s poetical technique, as exhibited in “The Secret Distances“ may here be briefly discussed. Out of the thirty poems in the book, thirteen are in alexandrines, whose austere and melodious cadences are but imperfectly conveyed in the passages quoted from “Art“. It is especially difficult to reproduce the effect of the sonorous feminine rhymes, in which Březina draws fully upon the ample resources of Czech word-structure. Such combinations, for instance, as nessál,—klesal, nezaplálo—málo, vstala—jala, embody verbal forms which have no analogy in English. This metrical regularity has been largely superseded by less rigid rhythmical schemes, and Březina’s last two volumes contain no alexandrines at all. As far as style is concerned, the abundant imagery which is so typical of Březina’s diction, is already present. A parallel may here be drawn between the development of Březina’s ideas and the medium in which he expresses them. His rapid successions of metaphors are not so effective in the sombre verses of “The Secret Distances“ as in the maturer poems, with whose warmer flexibility of movement and profounder range of thought they blend far more organically.

At the beginning of his career Březina’s name was associated with the group of poets, to whose official organ, the “Modern Review”, he was a frequent contributor. In its deeper aspects, however, Březina’s personality has little in common with the “Modern Review” poets. The melancholy temper of “The Secret Distances”, for example, bears only a superficial resemblance to the communings with death, horror and perversity, in which J. Karásek ze Lvovic, a prominent representative of this group, has so freely indulged, and in Březina’s later poems the divergency becomes still more pronounced.





↑ Alternately rhyming alexandrines in the original.

↑ Alternately rhyming alexandrines in the original.





About this digital edition


This e-book comes from the online library Wikisource. This multilingual digital library, built by volunteers, is committed to developing a free accessible collection of publications of every kind: novels, poems, magazines, letters...

We distribute our books for free, starting from works not copyrighted or published under a free license. You are free to use our e-books for any purpose (including commercial exploitation), under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported license or, at your choice, those of the GNU FDL.

Wikisource is constantly looking for new members. During the transcription and proofreading of this book, it's possible that we made some errors. You can report them at this page.

The following users contributed to this book:

[The list of contributors has been omitted as requested.]





